INTRODUCTION. 
In what relation the “Apology” of Plato stands to the real defence of Socrates, there 
are  no  means  of  determining.  It  certainly  agrees  in  tone  and  character  with  the 
description of Xenophon, who says in the “Memorabilia” that Socrates might have been 
acquitted “if in any moderate degree he would have conciliated the favour of the 
dicasts;” and who informs us in another passage, on the testimony of Hermogenes, the 
friend of Socrates, that he had no wish to live; and that the divine sign refused to allow 
him to prepare a defence, and also that Socrates himself declared this to be unnecessary, 
on the ground that all his life long he had been preparing against that hour. For the 
speech breathes throughout a spirit of defiance, “ut non supplex aut reus sed magister
aut dominus videretur esse judicum” (Cic. “de Orat.” i. 54); and the loose and desultory 
style  is  an  imitation  of  the  “accustomed  manner”  in  which  Socrates  spoke  in 
“the agora and among the tables of the money-changers.” The allusion in the “Crito” 
(45 B) may, perhaps, be adduced as a further evidence of the literal accuracy of some 
parts (37 C, D). But in the main it must be regarded as the ideal of Socrates, according 
to Plato’s conception of him, appearing in the greatest and most public scene of his life,
and in the height of his triumph, when he is weakest, and yet his mastery over mankind 
is greatest, and his habitual irony acquires a new meaning and a sort of tragic pathos in 
the face of death. The facts of his life are summed up, and the features of his character
are brought out as if by accident in the course of the defence. The conversational 
manner, the seeming want of arrangement, the ironical simplicity, are found to result in 
a perfect work of art, which is the portrait of Socrates. 
Yet some of the topics may have been actually used by Socrates; and the recollection 
of his very words may have rung in the ears of his disciple. The “Apology” of Plato 
may  be  compared  generally  with  those  speeches  of  Thucydides  in  which  he  has 
embodied his conception of the lofty character and policy of the great Pericles, and 
which at the same time furnish a commentary on the situation of affairs from the point 
of view of the historian. So in the “Apology” there is an ideal rather than a literal truth; 
much is said which was not said, and is only Plato’s view of the situation. Plato was 
not, like Xenophon, a chronicler of facts; he does not appear in any of his writings to 
have  aimed  at  literal  accuracy.  He  is  not  therefore  to  be  supplemented  from  the 
Memorabilia and Symposium of Xenophon, who belongs to an entirely different class 
of writers. The Apology of Plato is not the report of what Socrates said, but an elaborate 
composition, quite as much so in fact as one of the Dialogues. And we may perhaps 
even indulge in the fancy that the actual defence of Socrates was as much greater than 
the Platonic defence as the master was greater than the disciple. But in any case, some 
of the words used by him must have been remembered, and some of the facts recorded 
must have actually occurred. It is significant that Plato is said to have been present at 
the defence (Apol.), as he is also said to have been absent at the last scene in the 
“Phædo”. Is it fanciful to suppose that he meant to give the stamp of authenticity to the 