Some one may wonder why I go about in private giving advice and busying myself  
with the concerns of others, but do not venture to come forward in public and advise  the state. I will tell you why. You have heard me speak at sundry times and in divers  places of an oracle or sign which comes to me, and is the divinity which Meletus  ridicules in the indictment. This sign, which is a kind of voice, first began to come to  me when I was a child; it always forbids but never commands me to do anything which  I am going to do. This is what deters me from being a politician. And rightly, as I think.  For I am certain, O men of Athens, that if I had engaged in politics, I should have  perished long ago, and done no good either to you or to myself. And do not be offended  at my telling you the truth: for the truth is, that no man who goes to war with you or any  other multitude, honestly striving against the many lawless and unrighteous deeds  which are done in a state, will save his life; he who will fight for the right, if he would  live even for a brief space, must have a private station and not a public one.  
I can give you convincing evidence of what I say, not words only, but what you value  
far more—actions. Let me relate to you a passage of my own life which will prove to  you that I should never have yielded to injustice from any fear of death, and that “as I  should have refused to yield” I must have died at once. I will tell you a tale of the courts,  not very interesting perhaps, but nevertheless true. The only office of state which I ever  held, O men of Athens, was that of senator: the tribe Antiochis, which is my tribe, had  the presidency at the trial of the generals who had not taken up the bodies of the slain  after the battle of Arginusae; and you proposed to try them in a body, contrary to law,  as you all thought afterwards; but at the time I was the only one of the Prytanes who  was opposed to the illegality, and I gave my vote against you; and when the orators  threatened to impeach and arrest me, and you called and shouted, I made up my mind  that I would run the risk, having law and justice with me, rather than take part in your  injustice because I feared imprisonment and death. This happened in the days of the  democracy. But when the oligarchy of the Thirty was in power, they sent for me and  four others into the rotunda, and bade us bring Leon the Salaminian from Salamis, as  they wanted to put him to death. This was a specimen of the sort of commands which  they were always giving with the view of implicating as many as possible in their  crimes; and then I showed, not in word only but in deed, that, if I may be allowed to  use such an expression, I cared not a straw for death, and that my great and only care  was lest I should do an unrighteous or unholy thing. For the strong arm of that  oppressive power did not frighten me into doing wrong; and when we came out of the  rotunda the other four went to Salamis and fetched Leon, but I went quietly home. For  which I might have lost my life, had not the power of the Thirty shortly afterwards come  to an end. And many will witness to my words.  
Now do you really imagine that I could have survived all these years, if I had led a  
public life, supposing that like a good man I had always maintained the right and had  made justice, as I ought, the first thing? No indeed, men of Athens, neither I nor any  other man. But I have been always the same in all my actions, public as well as private,  
and never have I yielded any base compliance to those who are slanderously termed my  disciples, or to any other. Not that I have any regular disciples. But if any one likes to  come and hear me while I am pursuing my mission, whether he be young or old, he is  not excluded. Nor do I converse only with those who pay; but any one, whether he be  rich or poor, may ask and answer me and listen to my words; and whether he turns out  to be a bad man or a good one, neither result can be justly imputed to me; for I never  taught or professed to teach him anything. And if any one says that he has ever learned  or heard anything from me in private which all the world has not heard, let me tell you  that he is lying.  
But I shall be asked, Why do people delight in continually conversing with you? I  
have told you already, Athenians, the whole truth about this matter: they like to hear  the cross-examination of the pretenders to wisdom; there is amusement in it. Now this  duty of cross-examining other men has been imposed upon me by God; and has been  signified to me by oracles, visions, and in every way in which the will of divine power  was ever intimated to any one. This is true, O Athenians, or, if not true, would be soon  refuted. If I am or have been corrupting the youth, those of them who are now grown  up and have become sensible that I gave them bad advice in the days of their youth  should come forward as accusers, and take their revenge; or if they do not like to come  themselves, some of their relatives, fathers, brothers, or other kinsmen, should say what  evil their families have suffered at my hands. Now is their time. Many of them I see in  the court. There is Crito, who is of the same age and of the same deme with myself, and  there is Critobulus his son, whom I also see. Then again there is Lysanias of Sphettus,  who is the father of Aeschines—he is present; and also there is Antiphon of Cephisus,  who is the father of Epigenes; and there are the brothers of several who have associated  with me. There is Nicostratus the son of Theosdotides, and the brother of Theodotus  (now Theodotus himself is dead, and therefore he, at any rate, will not seek to stop him);  and there is Paralus the son of Demodocus, who had a brother Theages; and Adeimantus  the son of Ariston, whose brother Plato is present; and Aeantodorus, who is the brother  of Apollodorus, whom I also see. I might mention a great many others, some of whom  Meletus should have produced as witnesses in the course of his speech; and let him still  produce them, if he has forgotten—I will make way for him. And let him say, if he has  any testimony of the sort which he can produce. Nay, Athenians, the very opposite is  the truth. For all these are ready to witness on behalf of the corrupter, of the injurer of  their kindred, as Meletus and Anytus call me; not the corrupted youth only—there might  have been a motive for that—but their uncorrupted elder relatives. Why should they too  support me with their testimony? Why, indeed, except for the sake of truth and justice,  and because they know that I am speaking the truth, and that Meletus is a liar.  
Well, Athenians, this and the like of this is all the defence which I have to offer. Yet  
a word more. Perhaps there may be some one who is offended at me, when he calls to  mind how he himself on a similar, or even a less serious occasion, prayed and entreated  the judges with many tears, and how he produced his children in court, which was a  
moving spectacle, together with a host of relations and friends; whereas I, who am  probably in danger of my life, will do none of these things. The contrast may occur to  his mind, and he may be set against me, and vote in anger because he is displeased at  me on this account. Now if there be such a person among you,—mind, I do not say that  there is,—to him I may fairly reply: My friend, I am a man, and like other men, a  creature of flesh and blood, and not “of wood or stone,” as Homer says; and I have a  family, yes, and sons, O Athenians, three in number, one almost a man, and two others  who are still young; and yet I will not bring any of them hither in order to petition you  for an acquittal. And why not? Not from any self-assertion or want of respect for you.  Whether I am or am not afraid of death is another question, of which I will not now  speak. But, having regard to public opinion, I feel that such conduct would be  discreditable to myself, and to you, and to the whole state. One who has reached my  years, and who has a name for wisdom, ought not to demean himself. Whether this  opinion of me be deserved or not, at any rate the world has decided that Socrates is in  some way superior to other men. And if those among you who are said to be superior  in wisdom and courage, and any other virtue, demean themselves in this way, how  shameful is their conduct! I have seen men of reputation, when they have been  condemned, behaving in the strangest manner: they seemed to fancy that they were  going to suffer something dreadful if they died, and that they could be immortal if you  only allowed them to live; and I think that such are a dishonour to the state, and that  any stranger coming in would have said of them that the most eminent men of Athens,  to whom the Athenians themselves give honour and command, are no better than  women. And I say that these things ought not to be done by those of us who have a  reputation; and if they are done, you ought not to permit them; you ought rather to show  that you are far more disposed to condemn the man who gets up a doleful scene and  makes the city ridiculous, than him who holds his peace.  
But, setting aside the question of public opinion, there seems to be something wrong  
in asking a favour of a judge, and thus procuring an acquittal, instead of informing and  convincing him. For his duty is, not to make a present of justice, but to give judgment;  and he has sworn that he will judge according to the laws, and not according to his own  good pleasure; and we ought not to encourage you, nor should you allow yourselves to  be encouraged, in this habit of perjury—there can be no piety in that. Do not then require  me to do what I consider dishonourable and impious and wrong, especially now, when  I am being tried for impiety on the indictment of Meletus. For if, O men of Athens, by  force of persuasion and entreaty I could overpower your oaths, then I should be teaching  you to believe that there are no gods, and in defending should simply convict myself of  the charge of not believing in them. But that is not so—far otherwise. For I do believe  that there are gods, and in a sense higher than that in which any of my accusers believe  in them. And to you and to God I commit my cause, to be determined by you as is best  for you and me.  
  
There are many reasons why I am not grieved, O men of Athens, at the vote of  
condemnation. I expected it, and am only surprised that the votes are so nearly equal;  for I had thought that the majority against me would have been far larger; but now, had  thirty votes gone over to the other side, I should have been acquitted. And I may say, I  think, that I have escaped Meletus. I may say more; for without the assistance of Anytus  and Lycon, any one may see that he would not have had a fifth part of the votes, as the  law requires, in which case he would have incurred a fine of a thousand drachmae.  
And so he proposes death as the penalty. And what shall I propose on my part, O men  
of Athens? Clearly that which is my due. And what is my due? What return shall be  made to the man who has never had the wit to be idle during his whole life; but has  been careless of what the many care for—wealth, and family interests, and military  offices, and speaking in the assembly, and magistracies, and plots, and parties.  Reflecting that I was really too honest a man to be a politician and live, I did not go  where I could do no good to you or to myself; but where I could do the greatest good  privately to every one of you, thither I went, and sought to persuade every man among  you that he must look to himself, and seek virtue and wisdom before he looks to his  private interests, and look to the state before he looks to the interests of the state; and  that this should be the order which he observes in all his actions. What shall be done to  such an one? Doubtless some good thing, O men of Athens, if he has his reward; and  the good should be of a kind suitable to him. What would be a reward suitable to a poor  man who is your benefactor, and who desires leisure that he may instruct you? There  can be no reward so fitting as maintenance in the Prytaneum, O men of Athens, a reward  which he deserves far more than the citizen who has won the prize at Olympia in the  horse or chariot race, whether the chariots were drawn by two horses or by many. For I  am in want, and he has enough; and he only gives you the appearance of happiness, and  I give you the reality. And if I am to estimate the penalty fairly, I should say that  maintenance in the Prytaneum is the just return.  
Perhaps you think that I am braving you in what I am saying now, as in what I said  
before about the tears and prayers. But this is not so. I speak rather because I am  convinced that I never intentionally wronged any one, although I cannot convince  you—the time has been too short; if there were a law at Athens, as there is in other  cities, that a capital cause should not be decided in one day, then I believe that I should  have convinced you. But I cannot in a moment refute great slanders; and, as I am  convinced that I never wronged another, I will assuredly not wrong myself. I will not  say of myself that I deserve any evil, or propose any penalty. Why should I? because I  am afraid of the penalty of death which Meletus proposes? When I do not know whether  death is a good or an evil, why should I propose a penalty which would certainly be an  evil? Shall I say imprisonment? And why should I live in prison, and be the slave of the  
magistrates of the year—of the Eleven? Or shall the penalty be a fine, and imprisonment  until the fine is paid? There is the same objection. I should have to lie in prison, for  money I have none, and cannot pay. And if I say exile (and this may possibly be the  penalty which you will affix), I must indeed be blinded by the love of life, if I am so  irrational as to expect that when you, who are my own citizens, cannot endure my  discourses and words, and have found them so grievous and odious that you will have  no more of them, others are likely to endure me. No indeed, men of Athens, that is not  very likely. And what a life should I lead, at my age, wandering from city to city, ever  changing my place of exile, and always being driven out! For I am quite sure that  wherever I go, there, as here, the young men will flock to me; and if I drive them away,  their elders will drive me out at their request; and if I let them come, their fathers and  friends will drive me out for their sakes.  
Some one will say: Yes, Socrates, but cannot you hold your tongue, and then you  
may go into a foreign city, and no one will interfere with you? Now I have great  difficulty in making you understand my answer to this. For if I tell you that to do as you  say would be a disobedience to the God, and therefore that I cannot hold my tongue,  you will not believe that I am serious; and if I say again that daily to discourse about  virtue, and of those other things about which you hear me examining myself and others,  is the greatest good of man, and that the unexamined life is not worth living, you are  still less likely to believe me. Yet I say what is true, although a thing of which it is hard  for me to persuade you. Also, I have never been accustomed to think that I deserve to  suffer any harm. Had I money I might have estimated the offence at what I was able to  pay, and not have been much the worse. But I have none, and therefore I must ask you  to proportion the fine to my means. Well, perhaps I could afford a mina, and therefore  I propose that penalty: Plato, Crito, Critobulus, and Apollodorus, my friends here, bid  me say thirty minæ, and they will be the sureties. Let thirty minæ be the penalty; for  which sum they will be ample security to you.  
  
Not much time will be gained, O Athenians, in return for the evil name which you  
will get from the detractors of the city, who will say that you killed Socrates, a wise  man; for they will call me wise, even although I am not wise, when they want to  reproach you. If you had waited a little while, your desire would have been fulfilled in  the course of nature. For I am far advanced in years, as you may perceive, and not far  from death. I am speaking now not to all of you, but only to those who have condemned  me to death. And I have another thing to say to them: you think that I was convicted  because I had no words of the sort which would have procured my acquittal—I mean,  if I had thought fit to leave nothing undone or unsaid. Not so; the deficiency which led  to my conviction was not of words—certainly not. But I had not the boldness or  
impudence or inclination to address you as you would have liked me to do, weeping  and wailing and lamenting, and saying and doing many things which you have been  accustomed to hear from others, and which, as I maintain, are unworthy of me. I thought  at the time that I ought not to do anything common or mean when in danger: nor do I  now repent of the style of my defence; I would rather die having spoken after my  manner, than speak in your manner and live. For neither in war nor yet at law ought I  or any man to use every way of escaping death. Often in battle there can be no doubt  that if a man will throw away his arms, and fall on his knees before his pursuers, he  may escape death; and in other dangers there are other ways of escaping death, if a man  is willing to say and do anything. The difficulty, my friends, is not to avoid death, but  to avoid unrighteousness; for that runs faster than death. I am old and move slowly, and  the slower runner has overtaken me, and my accusers are keen and quick, and the faster  runner, who is unrighteousness, has overtaken them. And now I depart hence  condemned by you to suffer the penalty of death,—they too go their ways condemned  by the truth to suffer the penalty of villainy and wrong; and I must abide by my award— let them abide by theirs. I suppose that these things may be regarded as fated,—and I  think that they are well.  
And now, O men who have condemned me, I would fain prophesy to you; for I am  
about to die, and in the hour of death men are gifted with prophetic power. And I  prophesy to you who are my murderers, that immediately after my departure  punishment far heavier than you have inflicted on me will surely await you. Me you  have killed because you wanted to escape the accuser, and not to give an account of  your lives. But that will not be as you suppose: far otherwise. For I say that there will  be more accusers of you than there are now; accusers whom hitherto I have restrained:  and as they are younger they will be more inconsiderate with you, and you will be more  offended at them. If you think that by killing men you can prevent some one from  censuring your evil lives, you are mistaken; that is not a way of escape which is either  possible or honourable; the easiest and the noblest way is not to be disabling others, but  to be improving yourselves. This is the prophecy which I utter before my departure to  the judges who have condemned me.  
Friends, who would have acquitted me, I would like also to talk with you about the  
thing which has come to pass, while the magistrates are busy, and before I go to the  place at which I must die. Stay then a little, for we may as well talk with one another  while there is time. You are my friends, and I should like to show you the meaning of  this event which has happened to me. O my judges—for you I may truly call judges— I should like to tell you of a wonderful circumstance. Hitherto the divine faculty of  which the internal oracle is the source has constantly been in the habit of opposing me  even about trifles, if I was going to make a slip or error in any matter; and now as you  see there has come upon me that which may be thought, and is generally believed to be,  the last and worst evil. But the oracle made no sign of opposition, either when I was  leaving my house in the morning, or when I was on my way to the court, or while I was  
speaking, at anything which I was going to say; and yet I have often been stopped in  the middle of a speech, but now in nothing I either said or did touching the matter in  hand has the oracle opposed me. What do I take to be the explanation of this silence? I  will tell you. It is an intimation that what has happened to me is a good, and that those  of us who think that death is an evil are in error. For the customary sign would surely  have opposed me had I been going to evil and not to good.  
Let us reflect in another way, and we shall see that there is great reason to hope that  
death is a good; for one of two things—either death is a state of nothingness and utter  unconsciousness, or, as men say, there is a change and migration of the soul from this  world to another. Now if you suppose that there is no consciousness, but a sleep like  the sleep of him who is undisturbed even by dreams, death will be an unspeakable gain.  For if a person were to select the night in which his sleep was undisturbed even by  dreams, and were to compare with this the other days and nights of his life, and then  were to tell us how many days and nights he had passed in the course of his life better  and more pleasantly than this one, I think that any man, I will not say a private man, but  even the great king will not find many such days or nights, when compared with the  others. Now if death be of such a nature, I say that to die is gain; for eternity is then  only a single night. But if death is the journey to another place, and there, as men say,  all the dead abide, what good, O my friends and judges, can be greater than this? If  indeed when the pilgrim arrives in the world below, he is delivered from the professors  of justice in this world, and finds the true judges who are said to give judgment there,  Minos and Rhadamanthus and Aeacus and Triptolemus, and other sons of God who  were righteous in their own life, that pilgrimage will be worth making. What would not  a man give if he might converse with Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod and Homer?  Nay, if this be true, let me die again and again. I myself, too, shall have a wonderful  interest in there meeting and conversing with Palamedes, and Ajax the son of Telamon,  and any other ancient hero who has suffered death through an unjust judgment; and  there will be no small pleasure, as I think, in comparing my own sufferings with theirs.  Above all, I shall then be able to continue my search into true and false knowledge; as  in this world, so also in the next; and I shall find out who is wise, and who pretends to  be wise, and is not. What would not a man give, O judges, to be able to examine the  leader of the great Trojan expedition; or Odysseus or Sisyphus, or numberless others,  men and women too! What infinite delight would there be in conversing with them and  asking them questions! In another world they do not put a man to death for asking  questions: assuredly not. For besides being happier than we are, they will be immortal,  if what is said is true.  
Wherefore, O judges, be of good cheer about death, and know of a certainty, that no  
evil can happen to a good man, either in life or after death. He and his are not neglected  by the gods; nor has my own approaching end happened by mere chance. But I see  clearly that the time had arrived when it was better for me to die and be released from  trouble; wherefore the oracle gave no sign. For which reason, also, I am not angry with  
my condemners, or with my accusers; they have done me no harm, although they did  not mean to do me any good; and for this I may gently blame them.  
Still I have a favour to ask of them. When my sons are grown up, I would ask you, O  
my friends, to punish them; and I would have you trouble them, as I have troubled you,  if they seem to care about riches, or anything, more than about virtue; or if they pretend  to be something when they are really nothing,—then reprove them, as I have reproved  you, for not caring about that for which they ought to care, and thinking that they are  something when they are really nothing. And if you do this, both I and my sons will  have received justice at your hands.  
The hour of departure has arrived, and we go our ways—I to die, and you to live.  
Which is better God only knows.    
